# SUPPQUAL — Assumptions

The SDTM does not allow the addition of new variables. Therefore, the Supplemental Qualifiers special-purpose dataset model is used to capture non-standard variables (NSVs) and their association to parent records in general-observation class datasets (Events, Findings, Interventions), Demographics (DM), and Subject Visits (SV). Supplemental qualifiers are represented as separate SUPP-- datasets for each dataset containing sponsor-defined variables (see Section 8.4.2, Submitting Supplemental Qualifiers in Separate Datasets).

SUPP-- represents the metadata and data for each NSV/value combination. As the name suggests, this dataset is intended to capture additional qualifiers for an observation. Data that represent separate observations should be treated as separate observations. The Supplemental Qualifiers dataset is structured similarly to the RELREC dataset, in that it uses the same set of keys to identify parent records. Each SUPP-- record also includes the name of the qualifier variable being added (QNAM), the label for the variable (QLABEL), the actual value for each instance or record (QVAL), the origin (QORIG) of the value (see Section 4.1.8, Origin Metadata), and the evaluator (QEVAL) to specify the role of the individual who assigned the value (e.g., "ADJUDICATION COMMITTEE", "SPONSOR"). Controlled terminology for certain expected values for QNAM and QLABEL is included in Appendix C1, Supplemental Qualifiers Name Codes.

SUPP-- datasets are also used to capture attributions. An attribution is typically an interpretation or subjective classification of 1 or more observations by a specific evaluator, such as a flag that indicates whether an observation was considered to be clinically significant. It is possible that different attributions may be necessary in some cases; SUPP-- provides a mechanism for incorporating as many attributions as are necessary. A SUPP-- dataset can contain both objective data (where values are collected or derived algorithmically) and subjective data (attributions where values are assigned by a person or committee). For objective data, the value in QEVAL will be null. For subjective data, the value in QEVAL should reflect the role of the person or institution assigning the value (e.g., "SPONSOR", "ADJUDICATION COMMITTEE").

The combined set of values for the first 6 columns (STUDYID...QNAM) should be unique for every record. That is, there should not be multiple records in a SUPP-- dataset for the same QNAM value, as it relates to IDVAR/IDVARVAL for a USUBJID in a domain. For example, if 2 individuals (e.g., the investigator and an independent adjudicator) provide a determination regarding whether an adverse event is treatment-emergent, then separate QNAM values should be used for each set of information (e.g., "AETRTEMI", "AETRTEMA"). This is necessary to ensure that reviewers can join/merge/transpose the information back with the records in the original domain without risk of losing information.

A record in a SUPP-- dataset relates back to its parent record(s) via the key identified by the STUDYID, RDOMAIN, USUBJID, and IDVAR/IDVARVAL variables. An exception is SUPP-- dataset records that are related to Demographics (DM) records, where both IDVAR and IDVARVAL will be null because the key variables STUDYID, RDOMAIN, and USUBJID are sufficient to identify the unique parent record in DM (DM has 1 record per USUBJID).

All records in the SUPP-- datasets must have a value for QVAL. Transposing source variables with missing/null values may generate SUPP-- records with null values for QVAL, causing the SUPP-- datasets to be extremely large. When this happens, the sponsor must delete the records where QVAL is null prior to submission.

## Submitting Supplemental Qualifiers in Separate Datasets

There is a one-to-one correspondence between a domain dataset and its Supplemental Qualifier dataset. The single SUPPQUAL dataset option that was introduced in SDTMIG v3.1 was deprecated. The set of supplemental qualifiers for each domain is included in a separate dataset with the name SUPP-- (where "--" denotes the source domain which the supplemental qualifiers relate back to). For example, Demographics (DM) qualifiers would be submitted in suppdm.xpt. When data have been split into multiple datasets (see Section 4.1.7, Splitting Domains), longer names such as SUPPFAMH may be needed.

## When Not to Use Supplemental Qualifiers

The following are examples of data that should **not** be submitted as supplemental qualifiers:

- Subject-level objective data that fit in Subject Characteristics (SC; e.g., national origin, twin type)
- Findings interpretations that should be added as an additional test code and result. An example of this would be a record for electrocardiogram interpretation where EGTESTCD = "INTP", and the same EGGRPID or EGREFID value would be assigned for all records associated with that ECG (see Section 4.5.5, Clinical Significance for Findings Observation Class Data).
- Comments related to a record or records contained within a parent domain. Although they may have been collected in the same record by the sponsor, comments should instead be captured in the CO special-purpose domain.
- Data not directly related to records in a parent domain. Such records should instead be captured in either a separate general observation class domain or special-purpose domain.
