# TR — Assumptions

A findings domain that represents quantitative measurements and/or qualitative assessments of the tumors, lesions, or locations of interest identified in the Tumor/Lesion Identification (TU) domain. The TR domain represents quantitative measurements and/or qualitative assessments of the tumors, lesions, or locations of interest (e.g., tumors, cardiovascular culprit lesions, organs, bone marrow, other sites of disease such as lymph nodes) identified in the Tumor/Lesion Identification (TU) domain. These measurements or qualitative assessments may be recorded at baseline and then at each subsequent assessment to support response evaluations. A typical record in the TR domain contains the following information: a unique tumor/lesion/location of interest ID value, test and result, method used, role of the individual making the assessment, and timing information.

Clinically accepted evaluation criteria expect that a tumor/lesion/location of interest identified by the ID is the same tumor/lesion/location of interest at each subsequent assessment. The TR domain does not include anatomical location information on each measurement/assessment record, because this would duplicate information represented in TU. The multi-domain approach to representing oncology assessment data was developed largely to reduce duplication of stored information.

1. TRLNKID is used to relate records in the TR domain to an identification record in TU domain. The organization of data across the TU and TR domains requires a RELREC relationship to link the related data rows. A dataset-to-dataset link would be the most appropriate linking mechanism. Utilizing 1 of the existing ID variables is not possible, because --GRPID, --REFID, and --SPID may be used for other purposes, per the SDTM. The --LNKID variable is used for values that support a RELREC dataset-to-dataset relationship and to provide a unique code for each identified tumor/lesion/location of interest.

2. TRLNKGRP is used to relate records in the TR domain to a response assessment record in the RS domain. The organization of data across the TR and RS domains requires a RELREC relationship to link the related data rows. A dataset-to-dataset link would be the most appropriate linking mechanism. Utilizing 1 of the existing ID variables is not possible because --GRPID, --REFID, and --SPID may be used for other purposes, per the SDTM. The --LNKGRP variable is used for values that support a RELREC dataset-to-dataset relationship and to provide a unique code for each response and associated tumor/lesion measurements/assessments.

3. TRTESTCD/TRTEST values for this domain are published as Controlled Terminology. For some TRTESTCD/TRTEST values, CDISC CT includes codelists for use with TRORRES. The associations between the test values and results are in the Oncology codetable, which, along with the Controlled Terminology Rules for Oncology, is available at https://www.cdisc.org/standards/terminology/controlled-terminology. The sponsor should not derive results for any test (e.g., percent change from nadir in sum of diameter) if the result was not collected. Tests would be included in the domain only if those data points have been collected on a CRF, presented by the CRF collection system, or supplied by an external assessor as part of an electronic data transfer. It is not intended that the sponsor would create derived records to supply those values in the TR domain. Derived records/results (outside the CRF) should be provided in the analysis dataset (ADaM).

4. In order to support data value standardization it is sometimes appropriate to standardize an original result value in TRORRES to a standardized result value in TRSTRESC and TRSTRESN. For example, in the published RECIST criteria, a standardized value of 5 mm is used in the calculation to determine response when a tumor is "too small to measure." The original or collected value "TOO SMALL TO MEASURE" should be represented in the TRORRES variable and the standardized value should be represented in the TRSTRESC and TRSTRESN variables. The information should be represented on a single row of data showing the standardization between the original result, TRORRES, and the standard results, TRSTRESC/TRSTRESN, as follows:

    | TRLNKID | TRTESTCD | TRTEST | TRORRES | TRORRESU | TRSTRESC | TRSTRESN | TRSTRESN |
    |---------|----------|--------|---------|----------|----------|----------|----------|
    | T01 | DIAMETER | Diameter | TOO SMALL TO MEASURE | mm | 5 | 5 | mm |

    **Note:** This is an exception to SDTMIG general variable rule 4.1.5.1, Original and Standardized Results of Findings and Tests Not Done.

5. The acceptance flag variable (TRACPTFL) identifies those records that have been determined to be the accepted assessments/measurements by an independent assessor. This flag would be provided by an independent assessor and when multiple assessors (e.g., "RADIOLOGIST 1", "RADIOLOGIST 2", "ADJUDICATOR") provide assessments or evaluations at the same time point or an overall evaluation. This flag should not be used by a sponsor for any other purpose. It is not expected that the TRACPTFL flag would be populated by the sponsor; instead, that type of record selection should be handled in the analysis dataset (ADaM).

6. The evaluator-specified variable (TREVALID) is used in conjunction with TREVAL to provide additional detail of who is providing measurements or assessments (e.g., TREVAL = "INDEPENDENT ASSESSOR", TREVALID = "RADIOLOGIST 1"). The TREVALID variable is subject to controlled terminology. **Note:** TREVAL must also be populated when TREVALID is populated.

7. When additional data are collected about a procedure (e.g., imaging procedure) from which tumor/lesion results are determined, the data about the procedure is stored in the PR domain and the link between the tumor/lesion results and the procedure should be recorded using RELREC.

8. Any Identifiers, Timing variables, or Findings general observation class qualifiers may be added to the TR domain, but the following qualifiers would not generally be used: --POS, --BODSYS, --ORNRLO, --ORNRHI, --STNRLO, --STNRHI, --STNRC, --NRIND, --XFN, --LOINC, --SPEC, --SPCCND, --FAST, --TOX, --TOXGR, --SEV.
