# CP — Assumptions

1. The Cell Phenotype domain captures cell phenotyping and related data based on cell expression markers and other indicators (e.g., stains/dyes) in disseminated tissue specimens and cell suspensions.

2. The CP domain is only used for tests which include a phenotyping component that relies on using cell markers to identify a specific population of cells (e.g., quantitative cell phenotyping), or on which the test is conducted (e.g., quantitative single marker expression, target/receptor occupancy). For example, a test which measures gamma-interferon expression in helper T lymphocytes defined as the CD45+CD3+CD4+CD8- population is an appropriate test for including in CP, whereas a test which measures gamma interferon secretion in an undefined "PBMC" (peripheral blood mononuclear cell) population is not appropriate.

3. A value which is calculated and reported by a lab according to its procedures is considered collected rather than derived; the Derived Flag (CPDRVFL) should be null for these results.

4. CPCELSTA is used in conjunction with CPCSMRKS. When CPCELSTA is populated, CPCSMRKS must also be populated. Conversely, when CPCSMRKS is populated, CPCELSTA must be populated.

5. The combination of values in CPTEST, CPSBMRKS, CPCELSTA, and CPCSMRKS are used to uniquely identify a test. When 1 or more of the variables CPSBMRKS, CPCELSTA, or CPCSMRKS are populated, the Test Name (CPTEST) must be populated with the test name variant containing the "Sub" suffix to indicate that the finding/result pertains to a subpopulation of the cell type named in CPTEST.

6. Populating the CPTEST and CPMRKSTR variables: The general structure of CPTEST and CPMRKSTR depends on the use case (e.g., immunophenotyping, quantitative marker expression, target/receptor occupancy), which is generally conveyed by the CPCAT and/or CPSCAT value(s). Currently, CP supports the following use cases for which guidance on CPTEST and CPMRKSTR values are given:
   a. Immunophenotyping
      i. CPTEST is populated with the name of the cell type being measured, not with the set of markers used to define the cell type.
      ii. It is expected that CPMRKSTR is populated, and that it contains the entire set of markers used to define the test, including those that are also present in CPSBMRKS and/or CPCSMRKS.
      iii. Marker strings follow, as closely as possible, formatting recommendations presented in assumption 8.
   b. Quantitative single-marker expression
      i. CPTEST begins with the identity of the marker (e.g., CD99), followed by the word "Expression" (e.g., "CD99 Expression").
      ii. It is expected that CPMRKSTR is populated, and that it starts by identifying the marker being quantified (e.g. "CD99"). This is followed by a delimiter (described below) and then the entire marker string used to define the cell population on which the marker is measured, including the marker being quantified, since it also defines the cell population.
      iii. The general form of the delimiter used to separate the marker being quantified from the cell population on which it is measured is "<space>xxxx<space>", where "xxxx" represents a character string used as delimiting text. It is recommended that the delimiting text is the abbreviation for the unit of measure used to report the level of expression of the quantified marker (e.g., "MESF", "MdFI"). An example which follows this guidance is: CPTEST = "CD99 Expression" and CPMRKSTR = "CD99 MESF CD45+CD3-CD19+CD99+", where "MESF" is the text delimiter and is followed by the entire marker string defining the cell population on which CD99 was measured, which includes the CD99 marker itself.
      iv. Marker strings follow, as closely as possible, formatting recommendations presented in assumption 8.
   c. Other use cases (e.g., target/receptor occupancy), refer to the examples section and to published Controlled Terminology supporting CP. In the case of target/receptor occupancy a more generalized test value is populated into CPTEST (e.g., "Total Bound") and the identity of the target/receptor is included in another variable, such as CPBNDAGT and/or CPTSTPNL (refer to examples). CDISC will continue to develop examples for other use cases as they are identified and modeled.

7. Specifying viability:
   a. Because the majority of cell phenotyping tests of interest are for viable cells, the word "Viable" is not generally included in the test name (CPTEST) and usually does not need to be explicitly stated in CPCELSTA. Because populating CPCELSTA and CSMRKS with viability information necessitates appending the "Sub" suffix to the value in CPTEST (assumption 5), it is recommended that CPCELSTA and CPCSMRKS generally not be used unless a selective viability stain was included in the test in order to differentiate the record for viable cells from record(s) for cells in a different vital state. For example, when viable cells are being compared to apoptotic and/or non-viable cells, it is necessary to differentiate those records using CPCELSTA and CPCSMRKS. In such cases where CPCELSTA and CPCSMRKS are populated, the "Sub" suffix is appended to the value in CPTEST (assumption 5).
   b. Viability marker(s) used to define a test are included in the full marker string in CPMRKSTR regardless of whether the viability status is stated explicitly in CPCELSTA. Moreover, if viability is explicitly stated in CPGATE, marker(s) used to designate viability are included in CPGATDEF. For example, if the value in CPGATE is "Lymphocytes, Viable" and 7AAD- was used to define the viable state, 7AAD- is included in CPGATDEF, in addition to being included in the complete marker string in CPMRKSTR.

8. Recommended formatting of marker string variables CPMRKSTR, CPSBMRKS, and CPCSMRKS: The marker string variables provide critical information for defining a test. Although there are no current plans to control their values through CDISC Controlled Terminology codelists, adherence to the following formatting guidelines helps to preclude ambiguities that can lead to uncertainty in uniquely understanding a test and its associated result.
   a. Marker strings do not contain delimiting characters (e.g., ",", space, "/", ")") to separate individual markers within the string, nor do they contain punctuation (e.g., hyphens) within individual markers, as these can be confused with symbols used to designate levels of expression and/or make it difficult to distinguish between the individual markers that comprise the string. For example, although the scientific literature often uses "HLA-DR", this is represented in CP marker strings as "HLADR".
   b. Forward slash "/" is only used to separate the portion of the marker string defining a numerator from the portion defining a denominator.
   c. When referring to a marker using the cluster of differentiation (CD) designation, "CD" should be included as part of the marker reference. For example, a marker string for helper T lymphocytes comprising CD45, CD3, CD4, and CD8 markers would be "CD45+CD3+CD4+CD8-" (rather than "45+3+4+8-").
   d. The order of markers within a string is consistent across similar tests, generally proceeding in the order that defines the cell hierarchy from highest to lowest, followed by additional non-lineage-defining markers, and ending with cell state and viability markers. This order maintains alignment with how a test is identified using the ordered combination of CPTEST, CPSMRKS, and CPCELSTA. For example, a test for proliferating viable activated central memory helper T-lymphocytes would be operationally defined in CPMRKSTR as similar to "CD45+CD3+CD19-CD4+CD8-CD197+CD45RA-CD278+Ki67+7AAD-", where the order of markers in the string is "CD45" (leukocyte), "CD3+CD19-" (T lymphocyte), "CD4+CD8-" (helper), "CD197+CD45RA-" (central memory), "CD278+" (activated), Ki67+ (proliferating), 7AAD- (viable). Corresponding to this marker-based definition of the test, and using the appropriate Controlled Terminology terms, CPTEST is "TLym Help Cen Mem Sub", CPCELSTA is "ACTIVATED; PROLIFERATING", and CPCSMRKS is "CD278+Ki67+". If the sponsor also chose to include the viability status as a cell state in addition to the activation and proliferative states, CPCELSTA would be similar to "ACTIVATED; PROLIFERATING; VIABLE" and the corresponding CPCSMRKS value would be "CD278+Ki67+7AAD-". In this example, the named cell population in CPTEST has not been further divided into an unnamed sublineage based on additional sublineage markers; therefore, CPSBMRKS is null.
   e. Forward (FSC) and Side (SSC) light scatter: These parameters are generally used to perform initial gating to exclude debris non-singlets and are often reapplied to differentiate cell subpopulations in the "inclusion" gate. However, FSC and SSC are often not included in marker string definitions as it is generally taken for granted that they were used. In contrast, they are usually included in a descriptions of a gating strategy, and would generally be included in CPGATDEF when the full gating strategy is shown. Labs/sponsors may choose whether to include FSC and SSC parameters in CPMRKSTR. It is recommended to include them when they are needed to differentiate one test from another. For example, because there is no universal expression marker specific for lymphocytes, FSC and SSC are used to define the lymphocyte subpopulation within a CD45+ leukocyte population. A test of "Lymphocytes/Leukocytes" defined only in terms of CD45 expression would not make sense as it would be "CD45+/CD45+". In this case, it makes sense to define lymphocytes as "CD45+SSClo" so that the value in CPMRKSTR is "CD45+SSClo/CD45+".
   f. Indicating the expression level of individual markers included in a marker string: A variety of formats are used in the scientific literature for indicating the level of expression of a marker on or within a cell. For example, after identifying a marker such as CD4, its level of expression might be represented as 1 of the following:
      i. neg, min, or - to denote the absence or minimal expression (e.g., CD4neg, CD4min, CD4-)
      ii. pos or + to denote that the marker is expressed (e.g., CD4pos, CD4+)
      iii. high, hi, or ++ to denote that the marker is expressed at a very high level relative to simply being "positive" (e.g., CD4high, CD4hi, CD4++)
      iv. other formats (e.g., -/low, -/lo, low, lo, mid, -/+, +++)
   g. Because categories for expression levels are subjective in the sense that they are relative to one another, various formats often overlap, which can create ambiguities. Some degree of consistency in formats used to represent relative expression levels is warranted to mitigate ambiguity, at least to the extent that relative expression levels used to define cell lineages/sublineages are similar across studies and laboratories in order to enable comparisons. Five designations are recommended for use in SDTM datasets:
      i. "-" (the marker is not expressed; at times, the use of "-lo" may be justified to indicate that the marker is either not expressed or is present in a negligible amount)
      ii. "lo" (the marker is expressed at a low level)
      iii. "mid" (the marker is expressed somewhere between a low and "normal" positive level for that cell type)
      iv. "+" (the marker is expressed at a normal positive level for that cell type)
      v. "hi" (the marker is expressed at a distinctly higher level than in cells that are "+", such that they are distinguishable from the "+" population and define their own subpopulation)
      vi. Although these designations are expected to be useful in the majority of cases, it is recognized that designations not listed here may be more appropriate in some cases. The data provider must determine the best way to designate an expression level suited to the purpose of the test, while striving to mitigate ambiguities resulting from lack of consistency of use.
   h. Explicitly indicating the cellular sublocation for a marker: In most cases, the location of a marker on or within a cell is not necessary; however, there are situations in which a marker can be expressed in more than a single cellular compartment and there is a need for the test to distinguish between marker expression in one compartment versus another. To accommodate this, using a lowercase letter in front of the marker is recommended. The cell sublocations are usually related to the cell surface (plasma membrane), cytoplasm, and nucleus. Use m, c, or n in front of the marker to denote "membrane", "cytoplasm", and "nucleus", respectively. An example of a marker often associated with a need to indicate cell location is CD152 (CTLA4), where cytoplasmic expression may define a test to distinguish it from whole cell expression. In this case, "cCD152" is used to denote that it is the cytoplasmic expression of CD152 that is measured for the test.

9. CPNRIND can be added to indicate where a result falls with respect to a reference range defined by CPORNRLO and CPORNRHI (e.g., "HIGH", "LOW").

10. The variable CPORRESU uses the UNIT codelist. This means that sponsors should be submitting a term from the CDISC Submission Value column in the published Controlled Terminology List that is maintained for CDISC by NCI EVS. When sponsors have units that are not in this column, they should first check to see if their unit is mathematically synonymous with an existing unit and submit their lab values using that unit. If this is not the case, then a request for a new term (see https://ncitermform.nci.nih.gov/) should be submitted.
